Spatial transcriptomics technologies, named “Method of the Year 2020”1, have undergone rapid development in recent years. They are used to profile spatial locations of all detected mRNAs, providing a new perspective for biologists seeking to understand cells per se as well as their microenvironments. Broadly, spatial transcriptomics technologies can identify undiscovered transcriptional patterns and reconstruct transcriptional panoramas of whole tissues. On a fine-grained level, these technologies can be used to explore the interactions among neighboring cells and intracellular and extracellular states, which helps redefine the function of cells and improves our knowledge of diseases

The current spatial transcriptomics technologies can be mainly classified into two categories. The first category is image-based technologies, including in situ sequencing- and in situ hybridization-based methods3, which can profile mRNA with high spatial resolution, especially at the subcellular level. However, limitations such as the low number of profiled genes, low sensitivity of mRNA detection, and time-consuming processes impede the broad application of image-based technologies. The second category is sequencing-based spatial transcriptomics technologies, which capture position-barcoded mRNA with nongene-specific probes. These technologies can profile the whole transcriptome of tissue sections of any size, and are more user-friendly and less time-consuming than image-based technologies4. Moreover, spatial transcriptomics technologies are highly applicable and have been used to improve our understanding of various species, organs, and tissues, including the brain5, liver6, and tumors7.


Spatial transcriptomics approaches allow us to detect RNA transcripts in space, and these approaches have been used to investigate the spatial distribution of gene expression in various tissues and organs, including the brain1, heart2, pancreas3, and skin4. On the one hand, the spatial transcriptomics approaches based on in situ hybridization and fluorescence microscopy (image-based)—including seqFISH5, osmFISH6, and MERFISH7—detect the spatial distribution of transcripts with high resolution and accuracy, but they are limited in the total number of RNA transcripts that they can detect. On the other hand, spatial transcriptomics approaches based on next-generation sequencing (seq-based), such as ST8, 10X Visium9, and Slide-seq10,11, can capture expressed RNAs at the whole-transcriptome scale from spots in space, but each spot (radius 10–100 µm) may contain multiple cells, which limits the spatial resolution of these approaches. The limitations of these spatial transcriptomics approaches hinder their capacity to capture whole-transcriptome-scale data at single-cell resolution in space.


